[heavy typewriter keystroke,
light chimes, typewriter return slide, ♪]
In April 2014, Dutch students Kris Kremers and
Lisanne Froon went missing on a trip to Panama,
only for some of their belongings and
remainsto turn up a few weeks later.
These fragments of evidence -
including some truly bizarre photographs
- appeared under inexplicable circumstances,
and left investigators with more
questions than answers.
The Kremers and Frooncase is one of many unexplained
deaths anddisappearances around the world that share
some unexpected commonalities, and suggest at
the influence of other anomalous phenomena.
[heavy typewriter keystrokes,
light chimes, typewriter return slide, ♪]
Kris and Lisanne, 21 and 22 years of age,
worked at a café-restaurant in the city
of Amersfoort in the Netherlands.
The women planned a trip to Panama to learn
Spanish while volunteering with local children.
They flew into the island town of
Bocas del Toro on March 15th, 2014.
Two weeks later, they traveled to the
small mountain town of Boquete,
where they had arranged to
volunteer at a school for children.
They expected to return home on April 21st.
The women arrived in Boquete on
March 29th, as their photos show,
and they returned to their
hosts’ home before dusk.
The morning of Monday March 31st, Kremers
and Froon went to the children’s school,
but were told that they would have to wait
until the following week to begin volunteering.
The women could not find replacement
work, so with help from staff at
a nearby Dutch-run language school,
they arranged some sightseeing tours.
A Facebook post on March 30th
and a later text to Kris’s boyfriend
shows that the women intended to
walk around Boquete before then.
Two of the staff at the language school witnessed
the pair leave town around midday on Tuesday, April 1st.
Witnesses reported that Lisanne looked a bit sick.
A taxi driver later reported to have
dropped the pair off around 1:40 p.m.
at the beginning of the Pianista Trail.
However, other witnesses and
timestamps on the photos
indicate that the hike had
begun earlier that day.
Either way, Kris contacted her
boyfriend by phone around 2 p.m..
Kris and Lisanne had been wearing light
clothing and brought only a single backpack,
some money, a digital camera, their phones,
two water bottles, and likely a bit of food.
Later, Dutch police spoke to an innkeeper who
claimed that the pair had asked him for directions
for their hike and later returned, looking
tired, asking for help getting back to town.
There are conflicting eyewitness testimonies,
and it’s possible that many of these witnesses
may simply be attributing memories to the
wrong day, or remembering the wrong tourists.
The pair were scheduled with a local tour
guide at 8 a.m. on Wednesday April 2nd,
and their absence prompted
the guide to search for them.
By evening, the police and families were contacted
with help from staff at the language school.
The next day, local authorities, tour
guides, and residents began foot searches,
with dogs and air support arriving shortly after.
Authorities distributed flyers in the area, and
news of their disappearance aired on television.
Some family members and a friend of the
women traveled to Boquete to help the search.
The family offered $2500 USD to anyone who could
provide an actionable tip on the pair’s whereabouts.
Unfortunately, bad weather
hindered search efforts,
and with no traces found after a week and a half,
officials downscaled the search on April 14th.
The women's parents reached out on social
media, put up billboards, and built websites;
they even increased the reward to $40 thousand,
but all tips proved to be unhelpful.
Some witnesses spoke of seeing a red
car on the day the pair went missing,
but this car was never identified.
Later, two French tourists
claimed that on April 6th,
they walked the Pianista trail and met
someone who lived on the route who told
them to avoid the forest because they had
heard screaming the previous day or night.
Kris’s family members returned to
the Netherlands by the end of April,
but Lisanne’s parents arrived in May.
Near the end of the month, further search
efforts were initiated by a team of 18 Dutch
search and rescue volunteers with 12 dogs,
and later the Costa Rican Red Cross
provided 30 mountain rescuers.
Nothing was found.
In mid-May, an anonymous telephone
caller who declined the reward money
reported seeing two bodies
near the Culubre River.
Police released a map highlighting
the spot near a river crossing,
but after a search of the area announced
that the tip was a false alarm.
However, a report by the The Star of Panama
claimed that helicopter radar detected
skeletons but, due to the weather and difficult
conditions, officials were unable to recover them.
The women’s remains were discovered
the following month in the same area.
[heavy typewriter keystrokes,
light chimes, typewriter return slide, ♪]
On June 11th - nearly ten weeks since
the women’s disappearance -
an indigenous farmer was working by a river
around the village of Alto Romero when she spotted
a backpack near or in a river roughly 8
hours walking distance north of Boquete.
The backpack contained Froon’s passport, an
insurance card, a digital camera, the women’s
cell phones, $83 in U.S. cash, sunglasses, two
folded bras, and an empty plastic water bottle.
The backpack was discovered in an area previously
searched by the middle of April, but authorities
claimed that sniffer dogs had been prevented
from searching there due to dangerous conditions.
During a press conference on June 19th, Panamanian
prosecutor Betzaïda Pittí Cerrud announced that
residents of Alto Romero had discovered human
remains in a dense, wooded area along the upper
part of the Culubre River, roughly five kilometers
from the pair’s last known hiking location.
The items were scattered over a fairly large area.
They included Kris’s left pelvic bone and one
of Lisanne’s shoes with the laces done up.
Inside was a sock and some remains of her foot.
Also found here were Kris’s jean
shorts and a boot that matched
the brand and condition of the
ones that Kris had been wearing;
however, this boot was blue instead of brown,
and investigators chose not to test it for DNA.
This area had also been searched previously,
but again, authorities claimed difficult terrain
had prevented the dogs from searching there.
At the end of July, 2014, Kris’s parents returned
to Panama and walked the Pianista trail.
Search efforts by locals found more of the
women’s bones on July 30th and August 2nd,
including one of Kris’s rib bones.
Later forensic testing revealed all
of Kris' bones had traces of
phosphorus, resulting in white discoloration.
This can result from sun exposure
or from chemicals in the ground,
but the necessary phosphates
aren’t present in the local soil.
Tests on the other bones showed no
signs of trauma, fractures, or illness.
In August, the Kremer’s family
representative filed a complaint
against the Panamanian prosecution,
accusing them of mishandling the investigation.
Shortly after, the Kremers family discovered
that the Netherlands Forensic Institute
had failed to pass on information
to the Panamanian authorities.
Later, Kris’s parents revealed that
DNA from an unknown person
was found on the recovered backpack,
and that information from
Panamanian authorities indicated
that the women had been kidnapped.
One newspaper wrote that a
fingerprint found on one of the
recovered phones was in the Panamanian
database, but Panamanian authorities
did not obtain fingerprints from searchers
who would have handled the evidence.
At the end of August, locals found
more remains along the Culubre river:
two of Lisanne’s leg bones,
and a piece of skin from her leg.
Forensic testing determined
that the skin tissue was in
unusually good condition for the
almost five months that she was missing.
There were 33 scattered bones
and fragments recovered in all,
and strangely, DNA testing found that a number
belonged to three different unknown victims.
In September, the camera and phone
cases were tested for biological traces,
and Lisanne’s remains were investigated
by the Netherlands Forensic Institute.
The Institute’s investigators released
their autopsy report on September 19th,
and Pittí Cerrud concluded that
Kris and Lisanne died 8 days
after they went missing, likely
taken by the “swollen river.”
The lackluster investigation
efforts suggest to some that
officials in Panama wanted to cover-up
the case to protect the tourist industry.
With support from donations, a team of forensic
specialists was sent to Boquete in early January,
2015, made up of members of a Dutch dog
rescue team and a few Panamanian authorities.
The forensic specialists reviewed
all plausible scenarios, and walked
the Pianista trail to the Culubre River
where the items and remains were found.
The specialists concluded that becoming
lost on the trail was implausible,
and that the possibility of encountering
crime was “highly unlikely.”
They leaned towards a fatal accident, with the
team-leader stating that the end of the trail
had “slopes” leading to the river that
the women could have fallen down.
However, this accident theory was
contested by many outside parties,
and it doesn’t explain the sudden appearance of
the womens’ remains in a previously searched area.
[heavy typewriter keystrokes,
light chimes, typewriter return slide, ♪]
A wealth of evidence was found on the women’s devices,
though it didn’t offer any resolution to the mystery.
On April 1st, Kris made an emergency phone
call from an unknown location at 4:39 p.m.,
but no connection was made.
Lisanne attempted another call 12 minutes later.
At 6:58 a.m. the next day, an attempt was made
to call an emergency number from Lisanne's phone,
with another attempt using
Kris’s over an hour later.
The phones were turned on and off again
several more times in the following days,
with two more attempted 911 calls
from Kris’s phone on April 3rd.
The second time that someone tried using
Kris’s phone on April 5th, the user entered
the wrong PIN code, or failed to enter one
at all, causing the phone to stay locked.
The next day, around the same times
as the previous days’ attempts,
there were two more incorrect PIN entries,
and several more in the following days.
The phone was turned off for
good at 11:56 a.m. on April 11th.
After the women’s camera was recovered on June
11th, many of their photos were leaked online.
By the timeline set by authorities, at
least 33 photos were taken April 1st
showing the pair on the Pianista trail,
reaching the summit and going beyond it.
The next photo to be taken
was completely deleted,
and after that, their camera went
unused for the next seven days.
Only 51 of the remaining 100 photos
taken were leaked to the public,
though it’s possible that the remaining
49 photos were completely dark.
All but one of the leaked photos were taken
in the middle of the pair’s seventh night missing
- April 8th - between 1:29 to 3:22 a.m.,
local time, with the last image taken at 4:10 a.m..
Like the phone data, these so-called
“night photos” only raise more questions.
All of the photos were edited in
some way - most were brightened,
or had their camera settings data deleted.
Most appear to be taken with a
flash and contain some rainfall.
The majority show the same surrounding
foliage from different angles,
enabling analysts to overlay them.
The fact that so many flash
photos were taken pointed
straight up at the same break in the
tree cover suggests that the pair were
attempting to signal to would-be rescuers,
although no searches were conducted at night.
Other photos suggest that the women were
using the flash to orient themselves.
A few images stand out, notably image 550,
which shows red shopping bags
tied to a branch on a large rock.
Image 580 is especially unusual,
being a well exposed and focused shot
of what could be the back of Kris’ head - her hair
somehow perfectly dry and almost free of debris.
Another standout photo is image 509,
because it was deleted from the memory card.
Normally when a photo is “deleted” from a
camera, the image remains on the memory card
until it’s overwritten, suggesting that someone
must have used outside software to remove it.
Independent analysts have pointed out that the
digital camera’s date and time settings were
off by a year, meaning authorities could
have recalibrated the times incorrectly.
It’s also been argued that at least some
of the times or filenames are incorrect.
A private investigator close to the Kremers
family known only to the public as V.,
came to believe that the final photos of the
pair walking the trail were taken the day prior,
on March 31st, and that the perpetrators
changed photo data to April 1st.
This might explain why some testimonies
conflict with the official timeline.
In October 2015, writer and journalist,
Ramón Hernández, published a book compiling
Panamanian news articles and photos released
between April 29th, 2014, and the book’s publication.
He argued that the
circumstances pointed to a crime.
In 2022, Venezuelan-American
journalist, Mariana Atencio,
traveled to Boquete to reinvestigate the
case with Daily Beast reporter Jeremy Kryt.
Locals were reluctant to speak
about the disappearances,
but the team discovered that there are over 50 missing
women and girls in that area since 2009 alone.
The team also made allegations
of government corruption,
possible drug trafficking, and even
human trafficking and organ harvesting.
To further complicate the investigation, a
low-resolution photo emerged from an unknown
source which may or may not show Kris and
Lisanne swimming topless with two men.
Needless to say, there is no consensus
on what happened to Kris and Lisanne.
[heavy typewriter keystrokes,
light chimes, typewriter return slide, ♪]
Kremers & Froon weren’t the only
tourists to go missing in the area.
In 2009, Alex Humphrey, a 29-year-old British
man disappeared from the town of Boquete,
leaving everything behind except his
passport, credit card, and money.
Locals in the area have also met unexpected
ends, like 22-year-old Osman Valenzuela from
Alto Boquete who died shortly after
Kremers’ and Froon’s disappearance.
While his death looked like a drowning,
the autopsy found no water in his lungs.
It’s a near certainty that Osman
is one of the two men featured
in the photo with the
two female swimmers.
The other man in the photo was killed
the following year in a traffic accident.
Most worrisome, the last taxi driver to
drop Kris and Lisanne off on April 1st,
Leonardo Arturo González, was found
drowned the following year on March 2nd,
after he had just been seen
waiting nearby for some passengers.
Globally, a disturbingly high number
of people go missing every year.
Over 600,000 people go missing annually in the
U.S. alone, though many of these are later found.
While the Kremers and Froon
disappearance is unusual in many ways,
it fits several patterns observed in
missing persons cases around the world.
These patterns are researched most
prominently by retired police officer,
David Paulides, who’s produced several books
and documentaries under his Missing 411 series.
Paulides highlights over a dozen
standout traits or “profile points”
that he’s identified as being present in
many of the unexplained disappearances.
For example, many disappearances happen
in rural settings; often deep in the wilderness.
Search dogs can’t track a scent
from the scene of the disappearance.
In cases where the victim returns, they often lack
memory of the events, or describe “missing time.”
In cases where the victim dies, the body
is often found with some apparel missing
- often their boots - despite a thorough
search of the area, and frequently in a spot
previously explored many times by searchers.
Often, too, the body turns up
in or near a source of water.
Paulides also noted that it was usual for
large bones to be missing from the bodies.
For example, 48-year-old Robert Springfield from
Montana went missing September 19th, 2004.
The former Marine had gone out on a bow-hunting
trip with his 13-year-old son in the Bighorn Mountains,
an area he was very familiar with,
but he failed to return to the meeting spot.
Search efforts recovered nothing.
What remained was found October, 2005:
a partial skull and a femur next to a
“neatly” rolled belt, two boots,
a coat, and his untouched wallet.
Only his bow and arrows were missing.
The remains were just 50 yards from the
camp where searchers focused their efforts.
In his 2012 book, Missing 411, Paulides
stated that he had been presented with at
least six “viable hypotheses” to account for the
phenomenon, but didn’t detail what these were.
He stated only that there are “too many
consistent elements present in the majority
of cases for this to be mere coincidence.”
In recent years, however, he’s suggested that
these disappearances may be related to other
anomalous experiences and entity encounters.
Paulides’ latest documentary explores
the connection with the UFO phenomenon,
and he suggests that many missing persons cases
may have begun like other UFO abduction stories,
but differed in that the
victims were not returned.
In other words, what we know as UFO abduction
experiences may simply be aborted missing
persons cases, where the experiencer, for whatever
reason, was returned to their place of capture.
For Example, Paulides brings up the Carl
Higdon abduction of 1974, in which Carl
was apparently taken aboard a spaceship after
meeting a strange entity on an elk hunt.
Higdon was told that he was not
suitable for his abductors’ purposes,
which he took to mean that he’d had
a vasectomy, and couldn’t procreate.
Several cases suggest the
presence of a cryptid.
For example, in late January of 2019, in Craven
County, North Carolina, 3-year-old Casey Hathaway
disappeared into the woods, surviving
freezing and near-freezing conditions
for over two days until he was found just a
quarter mile from his last known location.
According to the family, Casey said that “his
best friend the bear was with him to keep
him safe” during the two days, though all bears
should have been hibernating at that time.
Paulides also reports that “dozens” of
North American indigenous peoples he’s
interviewed state that "Little People"
living in the forests regularly harass,
kidnap, and steal,
but it’s rare to ever see one.
Ufologist Jacques Vallée has drawn on the work
of scholars of European folklore to show that
Medieval Europeans believed the same things about
fairies, Lutins, Kobolds, and other mythical beings.
In fact, nearly all cultures
of the world have traditions
of some wild creature or spirit
taking people away to kill them.
[heavy typewriter keystrokes,
light chimes, typewriter return slide, ♪]
There are so many highly unusual elements
in the disappearance of Kremers and Froon
that no single explanation
can account for them all.
At the same time, however,
the case contains many elements
that fit with a larger pattern of unexplained
deaths and disappearances around the world.
Some of these missing persons cases, at least,
may also overlap with other anomalous phenomena,
including fairies, cryptids, and even UFOs.
[swelling tone, high chime, fades out]
Did you know that this video is also
available as an audio-only podcast?
Find it on Apple Podcasts or on
our website, ThinkAnomalous.com,
where we also have transcripts for every video.
Think Anomalous is created by Jason Charbonneau,
Research by Clark Murphy, Music by Josh Chamberland.